Hello, everyone.
My name is Alexey Proskuryakov.
I am an engineer on Safari and
WebKit team at Apple.
Welcome to session 515,
Using HTML5 Offline Storage.
There are more and more mobile
devices on the web these days,
and I'm talking about notebooks, tablets,
and, of course, mobile phones.
These devices are commonly connected
to the Internet over wireless networks,
and wireless networks are
not as fast as wired ones.
Even worse than that,
they're sometimes offline.
And these are not new problems.
You get offline when you're
on an airplane or when you're
in a garage in a basement.
But now user expectations are changing.
Your users are likely to get
frustrated when there is no signal
and they cannot use their apps.
They have grown very dependent
on their mobile devices.
So if they see something like this,
they won't be happy.
And what does that mean
to you as a developer?
Well, obviously you want your site
to load and work as fast as
possible on mobile devices.
And that means that users will be
more likely to come back to your site,
more likely to use your
web application often.
If at all possible,
you also want to work offline
so that users could be more
dependent on your web application,
and again, they would use it more often.
And finally, you don't want to spend
too much time on that.
You have a lot of other work to do.
You don't want to
rewrite your whole site.
to embrace the new technologies.
And you want your site to work
in all modern browsers on both
desktop and mobile platforms.
So these are the technologies that
I'm going to talk about today.
First, I'm going to give an overview
of the technologies that are
available for offline use.
I'm going to talk about
development tools and debugging,
since this is key to bringing your app
to the market in time and in great shape.
And of course, I'm going to talk about
what's new in Safari.
And there are quite a few very
nice new features in this area.
So I'll start with talking
about storing resources.
And what do I mean by
it when I say resources?
Let's have a look at how
a web application looks,
what it has inside.
Well, the web application consists
of a number of files,
like HTML files, CSS style sheets,
JavaScript files, images,
like Bing images and JPEG images.
It also needs to store some
data on a user's computer.
It can be as little data as
credentials to connect to the server,
or it can store preferences.
If it's a game, it can store high scores
or users' progress.
If it's a word processing application,
it can store a whole document offline.
And being a web application,
it obviously needs the
connection to the cloud,
a connection to the Internet,
so that users could
share their documents,
share their high scores and achievements.
That's what a web application is.
These files is what I call
application resources,
files from the top part of that chart.
When working offline,
you want all of these resources to
be available on the user's computer.
So kind of like the regular HTTP cache,
but with the regular HTTP cache,
there's no guarantee that the browser
won't evict some of the resources,
no guarantee that it will
download all of them.
You want more control over caching.
So how do you do that?
Let's have a look at the main
HTML file of your web application.
Say index HTML.
And here's what you need to change
to start using offline cache.
It's basically just one line.
And of course, if it's one line to start
using a new technology,
And this line is a reference
to a different file.
And obviously,
all the magic is inside that file.
Let's have a look at that file.
The application manifest file
can live anywhere on your server.
In this example, it lives alongside,
in the same directory as index.html,
but you can provide...
[Transcript missing]
All these resources will be
downloaded and stored on a
user's computer for offline use
or just for use as in a cache.
There's one thing missing here.
I talked about HTML files, scripts,
images.
But you have told us very clearly
that a modern web application
actually needs media files.
When you're writing a game,
It needs sounds.
And I'm very happy to say it,
that Safari now supports media
files in offline application cache.
Let's have another look at the
diagram of a web application.
Besides resources, there is offline data,
and there is connection to the Internet.
What are the technologies that
enable each of these boxes?
I have already talked about
HTML5 application cache a little.
For offline data,
it's local storage and SQL database.
I will be talking about these in
more detail later in this session.
And for network connection,
it's XML HTTP request,
a technology that you're
all very familiar with.
And it works, just like always,
with one exception.
It doesn't work.
All network access is blocked in
web applications that use offline
application cache by default.
And this is actually a good thing.
It makes development easier.
When you are creating your
offline application manifest,
you don't want to disconnect
from the network just to
test if everything is there,
how it works.
I've been talking about how
frustrating it is to users
to disconnect from the Net.
And obviously it's just as
frustrating to you as a developer.
You don't want to lose your email,
your instant messaging connections.
This is why application cache blocks
all network access by default,
making development easier.
And of course,
there are ways to work around that,
and I'm going to be talking
about these right now.
So this is the same application
cache manifest file that lives
somewhere on your web server.
But now there is one more section,
a network section.
In this example,
we have a web application
that wants to use Flickr API,
the Flickr Web API that's
exposed via URLs on the web.
And adding Flickr URL to
network section achieves that.
But there's a number of
URLs used by Flickr API.
And it would be difficult or
even impossible to list them all.
This is why the network
section is checked by prefix.
All resources that match
Let's start with the same string
that you have in the network section.
Can be retrieved from the network.
So just adding this single line
enables access to the whole Flickr API.
And that's just perfect
for an application that is
designed to work offline.
You list all of your resources.
In the first section,
you list a few prefix strings
for network connection,
and you're done.
It's not as easy for applications
that use offline application
cache just for caching that are
not intended to work offline.
They have a lot of resources that
need to be retrieved from the network,
and listing them all would be
time-consuming and error-prone.
We think that you have better
things to do with your time.
And happily,
the HTML5 Working Group agrees.
So now there is a way to specify
that all resources can be accessed
from the network by default.
Just put an asterisk
in the network section,
and now the technology
is perfect for caching.
So this is basically all.
You need to do about offline
application cache to start using it.
And there's just one more technology
that I'm going to talk about a little.
And that's the fallback section.
So,
say you have some images or some other
resources that you would like to access
from the network when working online,
but that are not essential for
the operation of your application.
For example, some preview images.
So if you create an image
tag with a link to that,
And the user is offline,
they will get a broken image icon.
That's not a great user experience.
To avoid that,
you obviously use this fallback section.
Lines in this section have two parts.
The first part is a URL that
might be accessed online,
but if it's not available,
a URL from the right part for a
resource that is cached inside
the application cache is used.
So in my example,
you could use a black image as a
fallback or an image that says "Preview
not available," something like this.
Anything is better than
a broken image icon.
So these technologies are all standard,
supported in most modern browsers,
and the browsers are deployed
on computers of a lot of users.
But you can do more if you target iOS.
There is a number of Apple-specific
tags that you can put in your
HTML file to customize the behavior
of your application on iOS.
For example,
you can say that you would like Safari to
hide its user interface elements.
Or you can specify an icon to use
when the user puts a link to your
application onto their home screen.
I won't be talking about these a lot.
They are very well documented
on Apple developer's site.
And there was a great session earlier
this week called Hidden Web App Gems.
And if you haven't had
a chance to attend that,
I highly recommend watching a video.
So here's how having an application cache
affects the behavior of your application,
what you can achieve by
having an application cache.
And that's a static picture.
The dynamic picture is that you want to
deploy new versions of your application.
You want to redesign,
do any changes you like,
like you did before.
And the main design principle
here is that the process of
application cache updating
Never leaves you with a mix
of old and new resources.
You obviously don't want to have
a mix of those after a redesign.
And that has...
Always been a problem.
You have to rename the resources to
avoid taking no resource from a cache.
You need to specify
cache headers and so on.
The application cache solves
that in an easier way.
So how does it achieve that?
When a browser starts loading a page
and it sees that there is an offline
cache manifest linked from that page,
it downloads it and checks if
the content of the application
cache manifest has changed.
If it hasn't changed,
the browser decides that
the application is the same,
and it just uses resources
that are stored locally.
What does that mean
to you as a developer?
That means that if you
change some resource,
like change a CSS style
sheet or edit an image,
You won't see it right after loading.
That's because the browser
sees that application cache
manifest hasn't changed.
It doesn't even check
for your new resources.
And to avoid that,
you will want to edit the
manifest file a little.
What I like is adding a
comment with a version number.
That way,
the browser will check all the resources
and download those that are new.
So the user has opened the page.
The browser has downloaded
all the new resources for an
updated application cache.
What happens next?
And perhaps surprisingly,
nothing happens.
The browser keeps both old and new
versions of your web application
and continues using the old one on
the pages that are already open.
And this is a case of the
same design principle.
The user has already opened the page.
They already have some of
their sources on the page.
You don't want for a button that's loaded
right after the application cache update
has been finished to look differently.
So the next time the user
opens the application,
it's then when they will use
the new application cache.
And I think that's what
most web applications want.
But just in case you really need
to update to the new look or new
behavior as soon as possible,
there's a JavaScript call for that.
Just swap cache.
And I don't really know
what's the use case for that,
so I'm not giving an example.
But there are ways to do that.
So what does this mean for users?
Application cache update is
completely transparent in Safari.
And that's exactly what the users want
If the web application is using
application cache just for that,
for caching,
users don't need to know that
the cache is being updated,
that it has been updated.
Why would they be interested in that?
An application that's
designed to work offline,
You might have reasons to
tell the user what's going on,
to show downloading progress,
or to tell that now it's okay
to disconnect from the network
since the application cache
has been fully downloaded.
And there are ways to do that.
There are DOM events that are dispatched
that you can use them for custom UI,
for progress.
And with this,
I would like to invite my colleague
Andy Este for a demo of using
application cache and using DOM events
for custom UI with application cache.
Welcome, Andy.
Thank you.
Thanks, Alexey.
So some of my favorite
web apps are games,
like I said.
I have a game here called
The Legend of Sadness.
It's written in the style of
these great 8-bit Nintendo games,
and it's written using Canvas,
all modern HTML5 technologies.
It's especially great on the iPad.
In iOS 5, we have these great
Canvas speed improvements,
and it works really well.
But, you know,
I use my iPad a lot of places where
I don't have a data connection,
where I'm offline.
And it would be great to, you know,
still be able to play a game
like this in those cases.
So let's see how we can use the
techniques that Alexey taught us to make
this web application available offline.
So let me switch to the machine
that hosts this application.
I've gone ahead and prepared
a cache manifest file.
My first line, as Alexey mentioned,
is the signature.
It's cache manifest.
I went ahead and included
a version comment.
Then I simply listed all the
sub-resources of the game.
There's about 42 of them.
It's a mixture of JavaScript and
images and style sheets,
etc.
All we need to do once we have
the cache manifest created is
add one line to our HTML tag,
one attribute called manifest,
and point it to the URL of
the cache manifest file.
So I'll save that.
And I'm going to switch back to the iPad,
and we'll reload the site,
and we'll see what happens now that the
main resource has a manifest attribute.
I've added some logging to the game
so that we can see what events fire.
So let me reload.
And so here's the logging.
The first event that fires
is an event called checking.
And every time there's a cache manifest,
there's a manifest attribute,
the checking event will fire.
And that indicates that the process of
updating the cache manifest has begun.
And what it does is it downloads
the manifest file and sees if it has
changed since the last time we saw it.
In this case,
this is the first time we saw it.
So we're going to download all
the resources that are listed in
that cache manifest file and cache
them in the application cache.
So the event we get when that downloading
begins is an event called downloading.
And I say we download them,
but we do it in a very smart way.
If that file is in the
HTTP cache and is still fresh,
we'll just pull it from there.
If it's not fresh,
we'll make a conditional request.
So we're not necessarily doubling
the network traffic just because
we're using the application cache.
As we go and download resources,
the event that fires for each
resource is a progress event.
And something that's new in iOS
5 is this progress event has
two helpful properties on it.
The first property says the number of the
resource that is currently downloading.
And the second property says the total
number of resources that will download.
So that's how I can display this 0, 1,
2 of 43 indication.
And that would be really useful if you
wanted to implement a progress bar,
for instance, or some other kind of UI.
So I'm just going to scroll through
all these progress events that fired.
Finally, we've successfully downloaded
and cached all these resources.
So the event that fires
is the cached event.
And that says this resource
is now in the cache.
And the next time you go to the site,
it'll be served from the application
cache instead of from the web.
So I'm going to close this dialogue.
I still have the start
screen of this game up.
And as Alexei mentioned, it's cached,
but it's not being used yet.
It's not being used until the
next time that I load the page.
So let me go ahead and refresh
so I can use the cached version.
Now, events fire again.
A checking event again fires.
And Safari looked at the manifest
file and said it hasn't changed.
So there's no need for an update.
So the event that fires
in that case is no update.
I'm going to close this.
And the game implements a
progress bar as it's loading,
and it looks like it's stuck.
It's kind of stuck halfway through.
Perhaps some resource has failed to load.
Another thing Alexey mentioned is that
network access is blocked by default.
So even though my iPad is online,
it can't access any resources
that aren't explicitly listed
in that cache manifest file.
So maybe I missed a resource.
Let's go back to the machine
hosting this and take a look.
So a helpful debug technique to
use in this case is to use Safari.
And if I load this in Safari,
So if I load it in Safari,
I see the same state
that I saw on the iPad.
What I can do is look
at the Activity window,
and the Activity window will list
all the subresources that are loaded.
And sure enough,
it's indicating that there's this
one resource that was canceled.
It was not allowed to
load from the network.
That's probably the one that
my game needs but is missing
from the cache manifest.
So I'm going to go ahead and add that.
I'm going to add it right here.
Resources, tllbundle.js.
OK, that looks good.
So let me switch back to the iPad,
and let's see what happens now.
So I'm going to reload again.
So another checking event fires,
as I expect.
And this time,
the cache manifest file has changed.
I added that line.
So because the cache
manifest file changed,
every single resource gets revalidated
and potentially redownloaded,
which is why you see, again,
another downloading event and more
progress events for each sub-resource.
And at the end, once this is all done,
the cached event was
fired the first time,
but every subsequent time,
an event fires called update ready.
And update ready means that the update
is now cached and will be served
the next time you load the page.
I'll close out of this.
Of course, I'm still in the state where
my application has this error.
But here's what I'm going to do now.
I'm going to reload it.
But before I reload it,
I want to disconnect from the network.
I really want to be sure that
this is actually working even
without a data connection.
What I'm going to do before that to make
this even a little nicer is I'm going
to add this app to the home screen.
And I'll, yeah, sure, call it that.
I included the right link
tag that can give an icon.
So now, instead of launching it
through Mobile Safari,
I can click it from the home screen,
just like any other app.
So let me go into settings.
I'm going to go to Wi-Fi,
and I'm going to disconnect from Wi-Fi.
So I don't have a 3G connection.
I don't have a Wi-Fi connection.
I'm decidedly offline.
I'm going to go and launch my demo app.
And something interesting happens here.
I'm offline,
but there is still a manifest
attribute on the main resource.
So I'm going to still try to
update my application cache.
So a checking event will fire.
Of course, I'm offline,
so Safari can't download the
cache manifest file and compare
it to the one that has cache.
So the event that fires in
that case is called error,
but this error is totally
expected when you're offline.
And Safari will continue to serve
the most recent version of the
application out of the cache manifest.
I'm sorry, out of the application cache.
So I'll close that, and there we go.
There's the game.
I'm totally offline,
and it's working great,
being served from the application cache.
Okay, well, back to Alexey.
Thanks, Andy.
So you can see that these DOM events
really provide a lot of insight into
what's going inside the browser,
what's going on with
the application cache.
So I have said it earlier that
users don't care what's going
on with application cache if
it's used just for caching.
And that wasn't true.
Actually,
users care about everything that's stored
inside their browser on their computers,
and that's because of privacy.
Anything that's stored
permanently inside the browser
can be used for user tracking.
And the most famous example of that is,
of course, cookies.
But everything else is
really just the same.
And this is why people demand
to have ways to see what's
stored inside their browser.
And they want to have ways to remove
all the traces that a certain site
has left inside their browser.
So let's have a look at
what UI Safari has for that.
Why does that matter
to you as a developer?
I think there are two reasons.
First of all,
You're going to use all the same
UI when developing your web application.
You will want
So start with a clean state to remove
everything to the original situation.
And secondly,
you will want to provide guidance
to your users so that you could
tell what they should expect,
help them if something goes wrong.
So here is a new pane in
Safari settings on iOS.
It's new in iOS 5.
It lists all sites that have
stored data on the computer,
on the iPad or iPhone or Apple touch,
and how much data the site has stored.
And this is actually
an interesting example.
You can see that YouTube,
the mobile YouTube site,
has stored about half a megabyte of data.
And you can bet that
it's not all cookies.
And yes, I have checked,
and the mobile YouTube site uses
application cache and local storage,
which is cool.
And if the user wants to delete all that,
they just tap this button.
The desktop version of Safari has
a new privacy pane in Preferences.
And the part that's
interesting to us here,
it's basically the same.
It lists all the sites that have
stored data on the computer.
You can see that there are a
lot more sites than in iOS,
since all sites that have regular
cache data are also listed.
This can actually also
be used for tracking.
And there are ways to remove the
data for some or all of the sites.
Besides the privacy controls,
there are some general maintenance
controls that are interesting to us here.
The user can reset
Safari to a clean state.
This is the Safari application menu,
the main menu of the browser.
Or the user can empty cache.
And this command empties both HTTP cache
and application caches for all sites.
Which is interesting because the user
can delete your application cache,
your resources,
Without deleting your
other locally stored data.
So your application needs to
be prepared for that situation.
So I have talked about application cache.
for storing resources.
I have talked about
connecting to the cloud.
And the last part is storing
and synchronizing data.
As you have seen in the
keynote and throughout WWDC,
Mac OS X Lion now supports autosave,
meaning that the user doesn't need to
save documents if they don't want to.
They can just close the application,
reboot the computer,
start the application again,
and their documents will come back.
The same has been
the situation with the best
web apps for quite a while now.
Users of web apps expect
That they don't want to
save the application,
their data, and that their data
will not disappear if something
bad happens and they need
to restart the browser.
Obviously, you cannot save to the
server when working offline.
But even when working online,
constantly saving after each keystroke
would be prohibitively expensive.
It would kill the performance.
So we have a trade-off to make.
We want to store all users' data.
We want to store it on the remote server
because users can start working on
their MacBook and then switch to iPad
and they expect the data to be there.
But you also cannot save all the time
because that's just not going to work.
We think that the question to ask
yourself here for your specific
web application is how much data,
how much work your users
would be prepared to lose
without getting too unhappy.
For example, with a game,
it might be just fine to be returned
to the beginning of a level.
If something wrong happens,
then you need to restart the browser.
With the word processing application,
it's more likely that people won't stand
losing more than a few seconds of work,
maybe half a minute.
I don't know.
So the answer
It depends completely on what users
of your web application expect.
And when you need to save very often,
you can try saving locally first.
And then uploading the data in
larger chunks to the server.
Then the user won't lose their work.
And also, they will be able to
switch between machines,
between computers.
So you save locally when offline,
or to improve performance.
What to do when the user is
about to close a window to
close your web application.
In that case,
there are some DOM events dispatched.
If you get one of those,
you know that the user is going
to leave your web application,
to close the window,
to navigate to another site.
And that's the time to fully
synchronize the data immediately.
So what are the technologies
that you use to store data?
Traditionally, you've been using cookies,
but those have a number of limitations.
First of all,
cookies are severely limited in size.
And even if you can store a cookie,
that doesn't mean that
it will stay there.
The size limit is per domain,
and if the limit is exceeded,
the browser can evict old cookies.
This is not a way to write
reliable applications.
Besides, all cookies are sent to the
server with each HTTP request.
And we have seen that for
many web applications,
the size of cookies dominates
the size of the request.
Meaning that cookies materially
affect the performance of accessing
resources from the network.
And besides,
cookies are a really old technology,
and they don't quite match the
modern model of web security.
They have a different notion of
domain that makes them difficult
to program with securely.
So we're not saying that cookies
are deprecated in any way,
no.
You're still going to use cookies,
for example, for authentication, sure.
But we don't think that storing
data in cookies makes sense anymore.
So what are the replacement technologies?
First of all, it's local storage.
It's a very simple API.
You can use it pretty much as a
drop-in replacement for cookies.
It just stores key value pairs,
It has the same security
model as the rest of the web,
origin-based security.
And let's have a look at the code,
how it's done.
You can see it's really simple.
There is a local storage object
defined in global object.
It's just provided to you by the browser.
And you set a property on that,
just like you do with the
property of any JavaScript object.
There's nothing different here.
The difference is that when
the browser is restarted,
the property is still here.
It's stored persistently.
And the values are all strings.
But you can store...
Any objects by serializing them to JSON.
However, if you find yourself
saving objects into JSON,
it might be a moment to consider using
a more powerful and flexible mechanism,
which is SQL Database.
A full SQL database,
a full SQL engine inside
your browser with everything,
with tables for structured data storage,
with triggers for
maintaining data integrity,
with indexes for high performance.
And the API is designed
for performance too,
even when dealing with
huge amounts of data.
The reason is that the
API is all asynchronous.
You tell the browser what you
want to do with the database.
You provide a function
to call when it's done.
And while it's working,
the browser doesn't freeze,
your web application doesn't freeze.
It's very good for performance.
And of course,
the API has the same security
model as the rest of the web.
Only sites with the same
origin can access the database.
Let's have a look at the code.
You can see that it's much more code,
but it's quite manageable.
What are the interesting parts here?
Here's the SQL statement.
I'm asking the browser to
select names and company
affiliations of all WWC attendees.
And when it's done,
a callback function is called.
And in this function,
I have access to all
the rows of the result.
The data is already structured.
I don't need to deserialize it.
And if something goes wrong, for example,
if there's no WWDC attendees
table inside your browser,
then an error function is called.
It's quite simple, in fact.
And with this,
I would like to invite Andy back with
a demo of using HTML5 Data Storage.
Thanks, Alexey.
So here I am on Twitter.com.
I like to use Twitter a lot.
I follow a lot of people on Twitter,
and I have this problem where
I often have too much data to
consume in sort of one sitting.
So it would be great if we could use
some of the techniques that Alexey has
been talking about to maybe cache this
information so that I can read it later,
possibly even when I'm offline.
So in the first demo,
we talked about using the
application cache to cache resources,
but that's not really appropriate here.
The resources of this page are things
like its icon and the scripts and style
sheets and other images that it uses,
things that either don't
change or change infrequently,
maybe when a new version
of the site is rolled out.
But that doesn't really describe
the data in the timeline.
The data in the timeline
is constantly changing.
Every second, every minute,
there's new data.
So the application cache is not an
appropriate technique to use there.
The appropriate techniques
are the two data storage
mechanisms that Alexey mentioned,
local storage and SQL storage.
So what I've done here is I've
written a Safari extension to
try to cache this information,
and I'm not going to go into a lot
of detail of the extension itself.
I hope you all saw the extensions
session that was right before this,
and if you didn't,
please watch the video online.
It goes into great detail.
But what I'll do is just... focus
on the part of the extension
that deals with offline storage.
So let me show you what I've done.
I've written an extension that
injects a script into Twitter.com.
And it basically extracts the
timeline from the DOM and sends to
my global page an object that is a
JavaScript array of dictionaries.
And the array is there's
one entry per tweet,
and each tweet is a dictionary that has
properties for things like the username,
the content of the tweet, the message,
etc.
So once I have that,
it's really simple to store
this information offline.
Now, I could use SQL storage.
I could write a schema,
and I could write SQL queries
to insert this data into SQL,
and that would work really well,
and it would be really performant.
You know, I'm kind of lazy in this case.
I didn't want to go
through all that work.
I wanted to do something
that was really simple.
So I decided to use local storage,
and local storage is
not a bad choice here.
We're dealing with, you know,
tweets contain small
amounts of information.
So we're dealing with
something that could easily
be cacheable in local storage.
So what I've done was I set
one property called num_tweets.
It simply stores the length
of the Twitter array,
the timeline array.
And then I iterate that array,
and I store a value for the name,
the username,
and the contents of the message.
And I just use a convention
for the key values of sort of
the property I'm interested in,
followed by an index into the array
so that I can pull it back later.
I could also,
another way I could do this is
I could serialize the entire
array of dictionaries into JSON.
And then store that
in a property as well.
So once we've done that,
we can really do a lot of things with
that data now that it's in local storage.
What I did was I created an
extension popover that simply
lists this information in a list.
And I'm clearly not a designer.
Maybe I should go to the
CSS talk to make this look good.
But, you know,
it conveys the right information.
It's a list of tweets, and it's not just
available on Twitter.com.
It's available, you know,
anywhere when I'm in Safari,
even when I'm offline.
And this isn't bad,
but I think we can make
it a little better.
There's some more information that's
in my timeline that I'd be interested
in including in this popover.
The most interesting
piece of information,
I think, is the user's profile picture.
It adds some visual
richness to the popover.
It also gives my eyes a way to
instantly kind of identify tweets from
certain users that I like to follow.
So let's see how I can do that.
It seems like it might not be possible
with a simple key value store.
But there's some tricks we can do
by incorporating other technologies
in HTML5 to achieve that effect.
So I'm going to open another file here.
What I have here is a helper function,
and it's called encode and store image.
And it takes two parameters.
It takes two arguments.
It takes a URL to one of
those images and then a key,
which is the key into local storage
where I want to store the result.
Now, I could just store the
URL directly and just load it
in my extension popover later.
But that's not going to happen.
But that wouldn't work if I was offline.
And I'm certainly interested in
making all this work seamlessly
both online and offline.
So I'm going to use another trick.
I'm going to create an image object and
give that image object an onload handler.
And what that onload handler is
going to do is get a reference to a
Canvas element that I've created in
the global page so it's not visible.
I'm going to get the
context of that image,
and I'm going to draw the image into it.
And once I've done that,
I can extract back out
of Canvas a data URL.
And a data URL is like any other URL.
You can use it in place.
You can use it in place of any other URL.
But the contents of the URL is
the image base64 encoded.
So the URL is the image itself.
So once I do that,
I store it in local storage using
the key that I've passed in.
And now that I have that
onload handler set up,
all I need to do is set the
image's source property to
the URL I'm just loading.
The network will load that image,
and sometime later,
my onload handler will get
called and do all this work.
So let's add this into my global page.
And then let's call it.
So I'm just going to-- the images
URL is passed along in this dictionary.
So whoops.
Nice.
There we go.
Okay.
So now let's take a look at,
so first let me,
I need to reload my extension.
So I'm going to reload my extension.
I'm going to go to, you know, apple.com.
And sure enough, I can click this,
and now I have images,
and this is all available offline
using a very simple key value approach.
So, okay, back to you, Alexey.
Thanks, Andy.
It's pretty cool technology,
and it also shows the difference
between data and resources.
You shouldn't think of all
images as resources necessarily.
And you don't need to update
your application cache,
basically your application,
just to add some data,
like in this example.
So we have talked about
a number of technologies.
Those were HTML5 Replication Cache,
two technologies for data storage,
And how HTML5 application cache
interacts with network requests,
with XMLHCP requests.
And this is quite a bit to swallow.
And a lot of developers have told us,
and we have experienced that ourselves,
that when you start using all this,
suddenly nothing works.
And it used to be pretty
difficult to debug.
It's getting better.
Let's talk about debugging
offline applications,
how you actually bring all
these technologies to market.
What do you do if nothing works?
Well, now you do just what you do
with any other technology.
You go to Web Inspector and check
Web Inspector console first.
We have added a number of error
messages for application cache update,
and if something goes wrong here,
if nothing works,
it's almost certain that there will be a
message in Web Inspector explaining why.
For a deeper look,
you go to Web Inspector Resources pane,
and we'll have a look at those very soon.
And I have said it before,
but I will repeat it.
Progressive events that are dispatched
And you can handle them from your
JavaScript to provide a lot of
insight into what is going on there.
You can use those to
provide UI or to debug.
They are really helpful.
So what does Web Inspector look like?
The resources pane has been redesigned.
All the data that's stored locally has
been gathered into this single pane.
And the first part of it is SQL database.
You can see all the databases that
your site have created and stored.
There is a nice visual representation.
But there's also this
little known secret.
You can type in any SQL statement,
and it will be executed,
and the results will be
presented graphically.
In this example, I select...
All entries from WWDC web track sessions
that have "offline" in the name.
There's only one,
so I'm glad you're all here to
learn about offline technologies.
It's a really powerful tool.
Of course, we display local storage.
Just the same nice
graphical representation.
And you can edit values
in local storage as well.
In this case, I'm editing a preference.
But if your game stores a
high score in local storage,
you should be prepared to the
more advanced of your users
gaining incredibly high scores.
Of course, we do display cookies.
And again,
it's all laid out quite nicely.
You can see it here because
all the columns are so small,
but all the information
is readily available.
And what's really new here is
the application cache pane.
Now that we support the
asterisk in the network section,
It has become even more
important to see what exactly is
inside your application cache.
You can see it just by
testing your application,
seeing if it works.
So here's the list of all the resources.
They have the explanation why
they're there in the type column.
It's not always obvious,
since you don't normally add a
manifest file to your cache or the
resource from fallback section.
And at the first glance,
it might be surprising that they're here,
they're there.
The type column explains why.
So we think that this
set of debugging tools
[Transcript missing]
So to recap,
I've been talking about a number
of offline web technologies.
And we think that these are becoming
Very important.
If you have previously optimized
your site for mobile platforms,
this is great.
But it might not be enough anymore.
People want the applications
to work even faster.
They want them to be dependable.
They want to play a
web-based game in airplane.
Why not?
and all the technologists are there.
If you have previously tried
using them and found them lacking,
We think that you should try again.
The platform has become more powerful.
The specifications have been expanded.
The implementations have improved a lot.
And developer tools
have become much better,
making it more practical to
work on these technologies.
And speaking of that,
Safari has great development tools.
We think that this is exactly what's
needed to work on these applications.
For more information,
please contact Vicky Merlin,
who is a Safari and
Web Technologies Evangelist at Apple.
All these technologies
are open standards.
And if you want maximum detail,
you can go to the standards
themselves on WattWG and W3C sites.
There's also great documentation
on Safari Development Center on
developer.apple.com.
I personally like this
documentation a lot.
To discuss the technologies
and to ask questions,
please go to Apple Developer Forums.
And also you can go to
WebKit Open Source Project.
WebKit is the basis.
under Safari,
the open source rendering engine.
And their project has a mailing list
and an IRC channel if you prefer
these methods of communication.
I recommend,
I have already mentioned that,
a session that
was earlier in the week.
Session about hidden gems for web apps.
And thank you.